## rsHRF (Resting State HRF Estimation and Deconvolution) BIDS-App Documentation

### Installation and Setup
----
This App can be used as a *standalone Python Package* OR as a *BIDS-App through Docker*. 

#### Standalone Python Package (Command Line Interface)
To be used as a command line tool, ensure that you have ``Python>=3.6`` and use the command ``pip3 install rsHRF``. This command takes care of all the necessary dependencies so that the tool is usable straight out of the box. Once done, run ``rsHRF --help`` to see the required positional and optional arguments. The command line for the app installed in this way is ``rsHRF``.

#### BIDS-App through Dockers (Command Line Interface)
To be used as a BIDS-App, ensure that you have docker installed. The image for the app needs to be pulled which can be done via the command ``docker pull bids/rshrf``. The App can then be run by launching an instance / running a container of this image via the command ``docker run -ti --rm bids/rshrf`` followed by the options for the app.

Running ``rsHRF`` after installing as a Python Package OR running ``docker run -ti --rm bids/rshrf`` after pulling the image through docker are equivalent. Thus, ``rsHRF --help`` is similar to ``docker run -ti --rm bids/rshrf --help``.

#### Graphical User Interface
To run the the application in a Graphical User Interface, run ``rsHRF --GUI``. For more information regarding the GUI, click [here](https://github.com/BIDS-Apps/rsHRF/blob/master/rsHRF/rsHRF_GUI/documentation/rsHRF-GUI-User-Manual.pdf).

### Usage
----
In essence, the whole usage of the application can be broken down to 8 major steps:

**The input:**

 There are 3 ways one can input data to this application.

 * A standalone ``.nii / .nii.gz or .gii / .gii.gz`` file. This option can be accessed using the
 ``--input_file`` optional argument followed by the path of the file.

 * A standalone `` .txt `` file. This option can be accessed using the
 ``--ts`` optional argument followed by the path of the file. 

 * A BIDS formatted data-set directory. This option can be accessed using the ``--bids_dir`` optional argument followed by the path of the directory. 
This requires the input dataset to be in valid BIDS format, and have a derivatives type with preprocessed resting-state fMRI data. We highly recommend that you validate your dataset with the free, online [BIDS Validator](https://bids-standard.github.io/bids-validator/).
   
 Out of the above 3 options, one of them is always required and more than one cannot be supplied at once.

**The mask / atlas files:**

 Mask files are only provided along with the ``--input_file or bids_dir`` argument. There are 2 ways one can supply the corresponding mask / atlas files.

 * A standalone ``.nii / .nii.gz or .gii / .gii.gz`` file. This option can be accessed using the
 ``--atlas`` optional argument followed by the name of the file.

 * The ``--brainmask`` argument which tells the application that the mask files
 are present within the BIDS formatted data-set directory itself (which was supplied with ``--bids_dir``).

 * Out of the above 2 options, both cannot be supplied at once. In the case where neither of the 2 options are supplied, the app proceeds to generate a mask by computing the variance, however, providing a mask-file is strongly recommended.

* Also, ``--input_file`` and ``--brainmask`` together are an invalid combination.

 The 5 use-cases are explained below:

 * ``--input_file`` : The standalone ``.nii / .nii.gz or .gii / .gii.gz`` file  is passed to the application for the analysis, the mask gets generated by computing the variance, and the outputs are determined accordingly.

 * ``--ts`` : The standalone ``.txt`` file containing a time-series (floating point values separated by line breaks), or multiple time-series' (`,` separated floating point values, where one time-series corresponds to a column). No mask file is required in this scenario, and the outputs are determined accordingly.

 * ``--input_file`` and ``--atlas`` : The standalone ``atlas`` and the standalone
 ``input_file`` are passed to the application for the analysis and the outputs are
 determined accordingly.

 * ``--bids_dir`` and ``--atlas`` : The standalone ``atlas`` is used with ALL the input
 files present in the ``bids_dir`` directory. Thus, the ``atlas`` serves as a common mask
 for the whole BIDS formatted data-set.

 * ``--bids_dir`` and ``--brainmask`` : This should be used when for each input file present
 in the BIDS formatted data-set, the corresponding mask file exists within the same data-set.
 The application then pairs the input_files with their corresponding masks provided that
 the 2 files share a common prefix.

**The output directory:** 

 The output directory is accessed using ``--output_dir``, and is the folder under which all the resulting
 ``.nii / .gii / .mat / .png `` files will be stored. The application further makes folders for each of 
 the participants / subjects if the input is supplied through the argument ``--bids_dir``.
 In the case of ``--ts`` argument, all the output types are stored in the ``.mat`` file. 
 It is mandatory to provide an output directory.

**The Analysis Level:**

 There are 2 kinds of analysis that can be performed. This can be accessed using ``--analysis_level``.

 * ``participant`` : participant level analysis performs the analysis for each (or some) subject(s) 
 present in the BIDS formatted data-set. This is mandatory when the
 input is supplied with ``--bids_dir`` as group level analysis is not supported yet. This should not be 
 supplied when input is supplied with ``--input_file`` argument. Doing so shall result in an error.

 * ``group`` : Coming Soon! - Use ``participant`` for now.

**The Analysis Method:** 

 The analysis can be carried out using 6 estimation methods.

 These are ``canon2dd``, ``gamma``, ``fourier``, ``hanning``, ``sFIR`` and ``FIR``.

 One of them needs to be supplied using the ``--estimation`` argument followed by
 one of the above 3 choices.

**The input parameters:** 

 There are many input parameters that can be supplied to customize the analysis.
 Please see all of them under the ``Parameters`` heading under the documentation
 by running ``rsHRF --help``.

**The participant labels:**

 Specifying which subjects to perform the analysis on can be given as a space separated
 list after specifying the ``--participant_label`` argument. Only the valid subjects
 in the list (which are actually present in the BIDS directory) will be considered.
 The ``sub-`` prefix should not be supplied.

**Select only certain BIDS files to be input to the BIDS-App**:

Using the ``--bids_filter_file`` argument, you can pass the BIDS-App a JSON file that describes a custom BIDS filter for selecting files with PyBIDS, 
with the syntax ``{<query>: {<entity>: <filter>, ...},...}.`` 

Queries can be defined for ```bold``` and/or ```mask``` in the ```.JSON``` file which allows the user to filter the BIDS-data to be input.

For example :

```
{
    'bold': {
     'datatype': 'func',
     'task': 'restingstate'
     'desc': 'preproc',
     'suffix': 'bold',
     'extension' : 'nii.gz'
     
     },
        'mask': {
     'datatype': 'func',
     'task': 'restingstate'
     'desc': 'brain',
     'suffix': 'mask',
     'extension': 'nii.gz'
     } 
}

```

The queries defined in this JSON file will filter the  ```bold``` and ```mask``` data according to the defined ```entities```.
The ```mask``` query will only have an effect when the ```--brainmask``` argument is defined.

rsHRF-BIDS app uses the following queries, by default :

```
   'bold' : {'datatype':' func', 'suffix': 'bold', 'extension': 'nii.gz', 'desc': 'preproc', 'task': 'rest'}
   'mask' : {'datatype': 'func', 'suffix': 'mask', 'extension': 'nii.gz', 'desc': 'brain', 'task': 'rest'}
```

This means that the BIDS-App by default checks for ```bold``` or ```mask``` BIDS-data that has the following entities: 

     bold : sub-<label>/func/sub<label>-task_rest-desc_preproc_bold.nii.gz
     mask : sub-<label>/func/sub<label>-task_rest-desc_brain_mask.nii.gz

Only modification of these queries will have any effect. You may filter on any entity defined in the PyBIDS [config file ](https://github.com/bids-standard/pybids/blob/master/bids/layout/config/bids.json) and [derivatives file](https://github.com/bids-standard/pybids/blob/master/bids/layout/config/derivatives.json)




### Example Use-Cases
----

#### Running the analysis with a single input file (.txt).

a) Through the Python Package

``rsHRF --ts input_file.txt --estimation hanning --output_dir results -TR 2.0``

b) Through the BIDS-App

```
docker run -ti --rm \
-v /path/to/input:/input:ro \
-v /path/to/output/directory/results:/results \
bids/rshrf --ts /input/input.txt --output_dir results --estimation hanning -TR 2.0
```

In the above example, the input file is a ``.txt`` file ``input_file.txt``. The estimation method passed is `hanning`. The `-TR` argument (which represents the BOLD repetition time) needs to be supplied here.

#### Running the analysis with a single input file (.nii / .nii.gz or .gii / .gii.gz)

a) Through the Python Package

``rsHRF --input_file input_file --estimation fourier --output_dir results``.

b) Through the BIDS-App

```
docker run -ti --rm \
-v /path/to/input:/input:ro \
-v /path/to/output/directory/results:/results \
bids/rshrf --input_file /input/input_file  --estimation fourier --output_dir results
```

In the above example, the ```input_file``` can be a ```.nii/.nii.gz or .gii/ gii.gz```  image. The estimation method passed is `fourier`. The `-TR` argument (which represents the BOLD repetition time) needs to be supplied if a ```.gii/.gii.gz``` input file is used.

#### Running the analysis with a single input file and a single mask file.

a) Through the Python Package

``rsHRF --input_file input_file --atlas mask_file --estimation canon2dd --output_dir results``.

b) Through the BIDS-App

```
docker run -ti --rm \
-v /path/to/input:/input:ro \
-v /path/to/mask:/mask \
-v /path/to/output/directory/results:/results \
bids/rshrf --input_file /input/input_file --atlas /mask/mask_file --estimation canon2dd --output_dir results
```

In the above example, the ```input_file``` can be a ```.nii/.nii.gz or .gii/ gii.gz```  image. The ``output_dir`` is the ``results``
directory. The corresponding mask is the ``mask_file`` that should have a matching extension (``.nii/.nii.gz or .gii/gii.gz``) with the ``input_file``. The estimation method passed is ``canon2dd``. The analysis level is not to be supplied here. The `-TR` argument (which represents the BOLD repetition time) needs to be supplied if ```.gii / .gii.gz``` input file is used.

#### Running the analysis with a BIDS formatted data-set and a common mask file to be used for all the input files present in the data-set.

Note: By default all input files in the BIDS directory need to be of the type ``*_bold.nii`` or 
``*_bold.nii.gz``. Also, they must be present in the ``func`` directory under their
respective subject / session folder.

a) Through the Python Package

``rsHRF --bids_dir input_dir --output_dir results --analysis_level participant --atlas mask_file --estimation sFIR``

b) Through the BIDS-App

```
docker run -ti --rm \
-v /path/to/bids_dir:/input_dir:ro \
-v /path/to/mask:/mask \
-v /path/to/output/directory/results:/results \
bids/rshrf --bids_dir input_dir --output_dir results --analysis_level participant --atlas mask/mask_file  --estimation sFIR
```

In the above example, the ``output_dir`` is ``results`` directory. The 
corresponding mask supplied is ``mask_file`` which should have the same extension as input files from the BIDS formatted data-set (``.nii/.nii.gz``). The BIDS formatted data-set
lies in the ``input_dir`` directory. The analysis level is ``participant``. The analysis will be performed for all subjects since no specific subjects are mentioned using ``--participant_label``.

#### Running the analysis with a BIDS formatted data-set that also includes a unique mask file for each of the input file present. 

Note: By default all input files in the BIDs directory need to have the suffix of the type ``*_bold.nii`` or 
``*_bold.nii.gz``. The corresponding mask files in the BIDs directory need to
be of the type ``*_mask.nii`` or ``*_mask.nii.gz``. Also, they must be 
present in the ``func`` directory under their respective subject / session folder.
Furthermore, two corresponding input and mask files need to have the same prefix.
 
For example, 2 corresponding input and mask files according to BIDS format can be ``input_bold.nii`` and
``input_mask.nii``. These 2 will then be paired up for analysis.

a) Through the Python Package

``rsHRF --bids_dir input_dir --output_dir results --analysis_level participant --brainmask --estimation canon2dd --participant_label 001 002``.

b) Through the BIDS-App

```
docker run -ti --rm \
-v /path/to/bids_dir:/input_dir:ro \
-v /path/to/output/directory/results:/results \
bids/rshrf --bids_dir input_dir --output_dir results --analysis_level participant --brainmask --estimation canon2dd --participant_label 001 002
```

In the above example, the output directory is ``results`` directory. The BIDS formatted data-set
lies in the ``input_dir`` directory. The associated mask files also lie within the BIDS dataset.
The analysis level is ``participant``. The analysis is performed only for ``sub-001`` & ``sub-002``
out of all the available subjects in the BIDS dataset.


#### Running the analysis using BIDS-filter to input certain files to BIDS-App. 

a) Through the Python Package

``rsHRF --bids_dir input_dir --output_dir results --analysis_level participant --bids_filter_file bids_filter_file.json --brainmask --estimation canon2dd --participant_label 001 002``.

b) Through the BIDS-App

```
docker run -ti --rm \
-v /path/to/bids_dir:/input_dir:ro \
-v /path/to/output/directory/results:/results \
-v /path/to/bids_filter/:/filter \
bids/rshrf --bids_dir input_dir --output_dir results --analysis_level participant --bids_filter_file /filter/bids_filter_file.json --brainmask --estimation canon2dd --participant_label 001 002
```

In the above example, the output directory is ``results`` directory. The BIDS formatted data-set
lies in the ``input_dir`` directory. The associated mask files also lie within the BIDS dataset.
The analysis level is ``participant``. A custom ``bids_filter_file.json`` to filter the BIDS-data input to the BIDS-App. The analysis is performed only for ``sub-001`` & ``sub-002``
out of all the available subjects in the BIDS dataset.







### Fin.
